PR: Add and update install guide to reflect standalone installers and other details (#296)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/installation.rst

Our standalone installers for Windows and macOS are available from Spyder 4.2 onwards.
We recommend using this installation method on those platforms, but we offer several other options for Linux, advanced users and specific needs, so keep reading if that's the case for you.

Downloading and installing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To download the supported Spyder installer for your platform, simply click the appropriate link below.
(For Linux, see the :ref:`anaconda_install_ref` section).

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Author: Okay, thanks for making me aware of the issue on Mac. Could you provide a link to wherever the exact steps needed for mac are shown/documented (or detail that here), so I can include them? I'm guessing you're talking about [this](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT202491)?

I'd also be curious to hear about what "the license issue" is given that was one of my areas of focus in Spyder in the past and there was at least one clear license violation I identified (using some GPL-licensed code that effectively requires Spyder be GPL) that Carlos refused to fix.

Just to be clear, was the above issue what you meant by "the workflow you are describing is not entirely correct" or is there something else I am missing?

As you'll likely agree, this sentence is rather long and syntactically complicated. Especially if we need to add more Mac instructions, we can split it off into a separate sentences, like this:

```suggestion
Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps.
If a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Open` or :guilabel:`Allow`.
On Windows, you may need to click :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`, and on macOS, you may need to click :guilabel:`Open Anyway` under :menuselection:`Security & Privacy --> General` in System Preferences.
```

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Reviewer: Yeah. The workflow you described is not entirely correct and yes Im talking about the information in the link. Seems that the link has the more accurate workflow. We are currently working with Ryan on adding a Mac license, it should be done soon.

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Author: Given the steps at the link I was able to find were a macOS-specific addition to what I described generically and for Windows, I was confused as to whether there was something incorrect about the latter, or just referring to that additional steps were warranted for some macOS versions.

In any case, did what I added in the suggestion address that issue, or is something more needed? If so, it would be helpful if you could make it as a specific suggestion, to ensure we're both on the same page and avoid any further confusion. Thanks.

I'm still not clear what you mean about a license problem, or how that relates to the Gatekeeper issue. @mrclary , could you help clarify the situation here?

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Reviewer 2: I cannot speak about licensing (GPL, MIT, etc.). The link that you pointed to refers to code signing and is the Gatekeeper functionality of macOS to prevent users from inadvertently using malicious software. We are hoping to address this issue with spyder-ide/spyder#16490.

Incidentally, in addition to going to preferences to allow opening an unidentified developer application, after the first attempt to open the application a user can also right-click on the application and select "Open" and the pop-up window shown in the link that allows opening the application will appear.

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Author: > I cannot speak about licensing (GPL, MIT, etc.). The link that you pointed to refers to code signing and is the Gatekeeper functionality of macOS to prevent users from inadvertently using malicious software.

Yep, that was my understanding as well, which is why I was confused when licensing issues kept being brought into it. Seems this was just a miscommunication. Also, thanks for linking the issue as I'd previously requested, so I can keep track of this.

>  a user can also right-click on the application and select "Open" and the pop-up window shown in the link that allows opening the application will appear.

Yeah, I initially considered saying that instead, but didn't want to confuse the instructions. However, I ended up revising things further just now to describe the install and run process on the different platforms more clearly and explicitly, and added that alongside the System Preferences method.

> Then, double-click the downloaded file and proceed through the steps (if a security warning pops up, you may need to click :guilabel:`Yes`, :guilabel:`OK`, :guilabel:`Allow`, or (on Windows) :guilabel:`More info` followed by :guilabel:`Run anyway`).

Author: @mrclary Does what I have now look good to you? If so, feel free to mark this as resolved, thanks.

.. _Windows Installer: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/releases/latest/download/Spyder_64bit_full.exe
.. _macOS Installer: https://github.com/spyder-ide/spyder/releases/latest/download/Spyder.dmg

.. note::

   "Lite" versions of both installers are also available from the `releases page`_, which are somewhat smaller than the full installers.
   These lack a number of optional but recommended dependencies, such as NumPy, SciPy and Pandas, meaning that full :doc:`/panes/variableexplorer` support for NumPy arrays and Pandas DataFrames will not be available, along with advanced data import and a few other features (you'll still be able to use them in your own Python environments, so long as you've installed them).

>    Given this only saves a modest amount of space while missing out on significant features, we recommend using the full installers unless minimizing download/install size and memory usage is your highest priority.

Reviewer: Not sure we need to mention this. Seems like we are saying they are not worth it and if they are not then why do we have them. What do you think?

Author: On the issue/elsewhere, Carlos/Daniel mentioned explicitly steering users toward full installers unless they have a reason to use the lite version, which makes sense. However, they are "worth it" for specific cases, as the above explains,

> [where] minimizing download/install size and memory usage is your highest priority.

If I was running Spyder on a particularly old or lower-performance device, as a number of our users do (for instance, I myself and other users have run it on Raspberry Pis) and don't need the Variable Explorer features, that could potentially save up to several hundred mb of disk space and memory, as well as decrease its surface area for potential bugs, which may make the difference in being able to use it or not.

Reviewer: I think I made the suggestion wrong. I meant the part starting from "Given this..." doesn't seem necessary

Author: Hmm, I didn't see any suggestion to begin with, which would have been very helpful in highlighting specifically what you were requesting. Do you mean the entire sentence starting with "Given this", or a specific part of it? The former is what I initially guessed you were referring to, and what I responded to above.

Reviewer 2: For the sake of clarity in this discussion:
* the full version is 725MB and the lite version is 405MB (as of 5.1.5)
* AFAIK, the lite version has limiting features only related to Variable Explorer
* Given our intent to isolate Spyder code from user's environments, I think that in the future the lite version may become the official version if/when:
  * the functionality of the Variable Explorer is not hindered
  * Spyder has its own package/environment manager

Of course the last point is far from certain, as it is a long-term development which may change or even be rejected.

I do think, at least for now, we should be steering users to the full version. It may be worth discussing with @spyder-ide/core-developers whether we should be creating the lite version right now. What do most users need? Is having two versions too confusing for most users? Is there a sufficient number of users of the lite version to warrant it?

When I first made the standalone application, I created both version primarily because I did not require the full version. However, I may not represent most users 😄 . I have also been considering that we should reserve creating the lite version only for releases, not for every pull-request. I.e. pull requests only create the full version (useful for full feature testing) and releases create both full and lite versions.

Author: Thanks for the details and confirmation, @mrclary . I've revised this section somewhat to simplify and clarify the description as a response to your and @juanis2112 's comments.

Its certainly worth discussing whether the lite version is needed, though I think it might be best to do that in another venue (like a spyder-ide/sppyder issue) rather than a review comment thread on this near-final PR on Spyder-Docs.

Reviewer 2: > Its certainly worth discussing whether the lite version is needed, though I think it might be best to do that in another venue (like a spyder-ide/sppyder issue) rather than a review comment thread on this near-final PR on Spyder-Docs.

Absolutely, I only mentioned it here for completeness and in case it was relevant to your efforts.

@CAM-Gerlach , thank you very much for your hard work revising and updating the documentation. I know how much work goes into this (I do quite a bit of documentation for my job at times), only to have it outdated so quickly 😄 .

Author: Thanks for your kind words, @mrclary . The lion's share of the credit for that goes to @juanis2112 , she's the one who does the really substantial updates, especially of the screenshots and GIFs that take a lot of time to re-do and need to be updated frequently given the constant UI changes in Spyder. I mostly just do reviews (which even that is now partially taken away from me, albeit forcibly imposed), minor updates/fixes and behind the scenes stuff (backend/infra/CI maintenance, technical changes, etc), and even that I was AWOL from for most of the past three months, and then caused no end of problems when I returned.

Incidentally, we were just speaking about possibly implementing a monthly "release" system for those types of changes to reduce the heavy load on her for that.

Author: In any case, @mrclary , do you think what we have here is good enough? If so, feel free to mark this as resolved, thanks.

.. caution::

   While we offer alternative Spyder installation options for users who desire them, we currently lack the resources to offer individual assistance for problems specific to installing via these alternative distributions.
   Therefore, we recommend you switch to our :ref:`standalone installers<standalone_installers_ref>` (Windows and macOS) or :ref:`anaconda_install_ref` if you encounter installation issues you are unable to solve on your own.

Windows
~~~~~~~

> Spyder is included in the `WinPython`_ scientific Python distribution (although Anaconda's powerful ``conda`` package and environment manager is not).

Reviewer: Not sure If the "powerful" is necessary. Sounds a bit pretentious and it doesn't add any important information.

Updating Spyder
===============

> To update a copy of Spyder from our :ref:`standalone installers<standalone_installers_ref>` on Windows and macOS, you'll currently need to download and install the latest installer (if on Windows, make sure to uninstall it first from Control Panel/System Settings).

Reviewer: I know the "a copy" makes it technically right but it might be a bit confusing for users. Can we not just say "TO update Spyder"?

Author: I'm not 100% happy with it either; "a copy" helps clarify that its referring to a specific Spyder installation (they may, and quite likely will have multiple if they have installed Anaconda) and was particularly necessary with the previous syntax. However, I rewrote it as proposed below to avoid a lot of word duplication with "install" variants and simplify it a bit, so "a copy of" is less necessary (though I still personally feel it is a little clearer and more explicit with it).

```suggestion
To update Spyder installed via our :ref:`standalone packages<standalone_installers_ref>` on Windows and macOS, you'll currently need to manually download and install the latest release (if on Windows, make sure to remove the old version first from Control Panel/System Settings).
```

Reviewer: Sounds better like this.

Author: Okay
